I. Routing concepts
  There are many key structures and performance-related characteristics referred to when discussing networks: 
  Topology, Speed , Cost, Security, Availability, Scalability , Reliability  
  
  The router uses its routing table to determine the best path to use to forward a packet. 
  When the router receives a packet, it examines the destination address of the packet and uses the routing table to search 
  for the best path to that network. The routing table also includes the interface to be used to forward packets for each known network. 
  When a match is found, the router encapsulates the packet into the data link frame of the outgoing or exit interface, 
  and the packet is forwarded toward its destination.
  
 1 - Packet Forwarding Mechanisms
  Routers support three packet-forwarding mechanisms:
  Process switching - An older packet forwarding mechanism still available for Cisco routers. 
  When a packet arrives on an interface, it is forwarded to the control plane where the CPU matches 
  the destination address with an entry in its routing table, and then determines the exit interface 
  and forwards the packet.  
  This process-switching mechanism is very slow and rarely implemented in modern networks.
  
  Fast switching - This is a common packet forwarding mechanism which uses a fast-switching cache to store next-hop information. 
  When a packet arrives on an interface, it is forwarded to the control plane where the CPU searches for a match in the fast-switching cache. 
  If it is not there, it is process-switched and forwarded to the exit interface. 
  The flow information for the packet is also stored in the fast-switching cache.
  
  Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF) - CEF is the most recent and preferred Cisco IOS packet-forwarding mechanism. 
  Like fast switching, CEF builds a Forwarding Information Base (FIB), and an adjacency table. However, the table entries are not 
  packet-triggered like fast switching but change-triggered such as when something changes in the network topology. 
  Therefore, when a network has converged, the FIB and adjacency tables contain all the information 
  a router would have to consider when forwarding a packet. 
  Cisco Express Forwarding is the fastest forwarding mechanism and the preferred choice on Cisco routers.
  
 2 - Configure Basic Router Settings
  The following configuration tasks should always be performed:
  Name the device - Change the device hostname
  Secure management access – Secures privileged EXEC, user EXEC, and remote access.
  Configure a banner – Provides legal notification of unauthorized access. 
  
  To be available, an interface must be:
  Configured with an IP address and a subnet mask - Use the ip address ip-address subnet-mask interface configuration command.
  Activated - By default, LAN and WAN interfaces are not activated (shutdown). To enable an interface, it must be activated using the no shutdown command.
  
  Optional
  serial interface connecting to the serial cable end labeled DCE must be configured with the clock rate command.
  
  IPv6
  ipv6 unicast-routing
  ipv6 address ipv6-address/prefix-length
  ipv6 address ipv6-address/prefix-length eui-64
  ipv6 address ipv6-address/prefix-length link-local
  
 3 - Verify Interface Settings
  show ip interface brief
  show ip route
  show running-config  
  
  Pipes in commands
  The filtering parameters that can be configured after the pipe include:
  section - Shows entire section that starts with the filtering expression
  include - Includes all output lines that match the filtering expression
  exclude - Excludes all output lines that match the filtering expression
  begin - Shows all the output lines from a certain point, starting with the line that matches the filtering expression
  
  show history
  terminal history size SIZE
  
  Cisco IOS uses what is known as the administrative distance (AD) to determine the route to install into the IP routing table. 
  The AD represents the "trustworthiness" of the route; the lower the AD, the more trustworthy the route 
  
  IPv4 static routes are configured using the following command:
  Router(config)# ip route network mask { next-hop-ip | exit-intf }
  
  
II. Static Routing
  A router can learn about remote networks in one of two ways:
  Manually - Remote networks are manually entered into the route table using static routes.
  Dynamically - Remote routes are automatically learned using a dynamic routing protocol.
  
 1 - Static Routing Usage
  Static routing provides some advantages over dynamic routing, including:
  Static routes are not advertised over the network, resulting in better security.
  Static routes use less bandwidth than dynamic routing protocols, no CPU cycles are used to calculate and communicate routes.  
  The path a static route uses to send data is known.
  
  Static routing has the following disadvantages:
  Initial configuration and maintenance is time-consuming.
  Configuration is error-prone, especially in large networks.
  Administrator intervention is required to maintain changing route information.
  Does not scale well with growing networks; maintenance becomes cumbersome.
  Requires complete knowledge of the whole network for proper implementation.
  
  Static routing has three primary uses:
  Providing ease of routing table maintenance in smaller networks that are not expected to grow significantly.
  Routing to and from stub networks. A stub network is a network accessed by a single route, and the router has only one neighbor
  Using a single default route to represent a path to any network that does not have a more specific match with another route in the routing table.
  
 2 - Types of static routes
  The following types of IPv4 and IPv6 static routes will be discussed:
  
  Standard static route
  Both IPv4 and IPv6 support the configuration of static routes. 
  Static routes are useful when connecting to a specific remote network.
  
  Default static route
  A default route is a route that matches all packets and is used by the router if a packet does not match any other, 
  more specific route in the routing table.
  
  Summary static route
  To reduce the number of routing table entries, multiple static routes can be summarized into a single static route if:
  The destination networks are contiguous and can be summarized into a single network address.
  The multiple static routes all use the same exit interface or next-hop IP address.
  
  Floating static route
  Floating static routes are static routes that are used to provide a backup path to a primary static or dynamic route, in the event of a link failure. 
  The floating static route is only used when the primary route is not available.
  To accomplish this, the floating static route is configured with a higher administrative distance than the primary route.
  
  Route types:
  Next-hop route - Only the next-hop IP address is specified
  Directly connected static route - Only the router exit interface is specified
  Fully specified static route - The next-hop IP address and exit interface are specified
  
  AD of the most common routing protocols                     example floating(backup) static route config
  EIGRP = 90                                                   ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 192.168.1.1  5
  IGRP = 100                                                       CMD       NET           Next-HOP  AD
  OSPF = 110
  IS-IS = 115
  RIP = 120
  
  
III. Dynamic Routing 
  As networks evolved and became more complex, new routing protocols emerged.
  The RIP protocol was updated to RIPv2 to accommodate growth in the network environment.
  However, RIPv2 still does not scale to the larger network implementations of today. 
  To address the needs of larger networks, two advanced routing protocols were developed: 
  Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System (IS-IS).
  Cisco developed the Interior Gateway Routing Protocol (IGRP) and Enhanced IGRP (EIGRP), 
  which also scales well in larger network implementations.
  The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is now used between Internet service providers (ISPs).
  
 1 - Dynamic Routing Protocol Components
  The purpose of dynamic routing protocols includes:
  Discovery of remote networks
  Maintaining up-to-date routing information
  Choosing the best path to destination networks
  Ability to find a new best path if the current path is no longer available
  
  The main components of dynamic routing protocols include:
  Data structures - Routing protocols typically use tables or databases for its operations. 
  This information is kept in RAM.
  
  Routing protocol messages - Routing protocols use various types of messages to discover neighboring routers, 
  exchange routing information, and other tasks to learn and maintain accurate information about the network.
  
  Algorithm - An algorithm is a finite list of steps used to accomplish a task. Routing protocols use algorithms 
  for facilitating routing information and for best path determination.
  
 2 - Router RIP Configuration Mode
  RIP configuration commands:
  router rip
  version 2
  no auto summary
  network NET  
  
  By default, RIP updates are forwarded out all RIP-enabled interfaces. However, RIP updates really only need 
  to be sent out interfaces that are connected to other RIPenabled routers. 
  Sending out unneeded updates on a LAN impacts the network in three ways:
  
  Wasted Bandwidth - Bandwidth is used to transport unnecessary updates.
  Because RIP updates are either broadcasted or multicasted, switches also forward the updates out all ports.
  
  Wasted Resources - All devices on the LAN must process the update up to the transport layers, at which point the devices will discard the update.
  
  Security Risk - Advertising updates on a broadcast network is a security risk. 
  RIP updates can be intercepted with packet sniffing software.
  
  Use the passive-interface router configuration command to prevent the transmission of routing updates through a router interface, 
  but still allow that network to be advertised to other routers.
  
  Propagate a Default Route
  To propagate a default route in RIP, the edge router must be configured with:
  A default static route using the ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 command.
  The default-information originate router configuration command.
  
 3 - Routing table terms
  Routes are discussed in terms of:
    
  Ultimate route
  An ultimate route is a routing table entry that contains either a next-hop IPv4 address or an exit interface. 
  Directly connected, dynamically learned, and local routes are ultimate routes.
  
  Level 1 route
  A level 1 route is a route with a subnet mask equal to or less than the classful mask of the network address. 
  Therefore, a level 1 route can be a:
  Network route - A network route that has a subnet mask equal to that of the classful mask.
  Supernet route - A supernet route is a network address with a mask less than the classful mask, for example, a summary address.
  Default route - A default route is a static route with the address 0.0.0.0/0.
  
  Level 1 parent route
  A parent route is a level 1 network route that is subnetted. 
  A parent route can never be an ultimate route.
  
  Level 2 child routes
  A level 2 child route is a route that is a subnet of a classful network address.

  Routers forward packets to the best route choosen.
  Best Route = Longest Match


IV. Switched Networks
  
 1 - Hierarchy in the Borderless Switched Network
  Borderless switched network design guidelines are built upon the following principles:
  Hierarchical - Facilitates understanding the role of each device at every tier, simplifies deployment, 
  operation, and management, and reduces fault domains at every tier
  Modularity - Allows seamless network expansion and integrated service enablement on an on-demand basis
  Resiliency - Satisfies user expectations for keeping the network always on
  Flexibility - Allows intelligent traffic load sharing by using all network resources

 2 - Access, Distribution, and Core Layers
  Access Layer
  The access layer represents the network edge, where traffic enters or exits the campus network. 
  Traditionally, the primary function of an access layer switch is to provide network access to the user. 
  Access layer switches connect to distribution layer switches, which implement network foundation technologies such as 
  routing, quality of service, and security.
 
  Distribution Layer
  The distribution layer interfaces between the access layer and the core layer to provide many important functions, including:
  Aggregating large-scale wiring closet networks
  Aggregating Layer 2 broadcast domains and Layer 3 routing boundaries
  Providing intelligent switching, routing, and network access policy functions to access the rest of the network
  Providing high availability through redundant distribution layer switches to the end-user and equal cost paths to the core
  Providing differentiated services to various classes of service applications at the edge of the network
  
  Core Layer
  The core layer is the network backbone. It connects several layers of the campus network. 
  The core layer serves as the aggregator for all of the other campus blocks and ties the campus together with the rest of the network. 
  The primary purpose of the core layer is to provide fault isolation and high-speed backbone connectivity.

  These options are sometimes referred to as switch form factors.
  Fixed Configuration Switches
  Modular Configuration Switches
  Stackable Configuration Switches

 3 - Collision Domains
  In hub-based Ethernet segments, network devices compete for the medium, because devices must take turns when transmitting. 
  The network segments that share the same bandwidth between devices are known as collision domains.
  If an Ethernet switch port is operating in half duplex, each segment is in its own collision domain. 
  However, Ethernet switch ports operating in full duplex eliminate collisions; therefore, there is no collision domain.

  The following are some important characteristics of switches that contribute to alleviating network congestion:
  High port density - Switches have high-port densities: 24- and 48-port switches are often just a single rack unit
  Large frame buffers - The ability to store more received frames before having to start dropping them is useful
  Port speed - Depending on the cost of a switch, it may be possible to support a mixture of speeds. Ports of 100 Mb/s, and 1 or 10 Gb/s are common
  Fast internal switching - Having fast internal forwarding capabilities allows high performance. The method that is used may be a fast internal 
  bus or shared memory, which affects the overall performance of the switch.
  Low per-port cost - Switches provide high-port density at a lower cost.

 
V. Switch Configuration
   
 1 - Switch Boot Sequence
  After a Cisco switch is powered on, it goes through the following boot sequence:
  1. First, the switch loads a power-on self-test (POST) program stored in ROM. POST checks the CPU subsystem. 
  It tests the CPU, DRAM, and the portion of the flash device that makes up the flash file system.  
  2. Next, the switch loads the boot loader software. The boot loader is a small program stored in ROM 
  that is run immediately after POST successfully completes.
  3. The boot loader performs low-level CPU initialization. It initializes the CPU registers, 
  which control where physical memory is mapped, the quantity of memory, and its speed.
  4. The boot loader initializes the flash file system on the system board.
  5. Finally, the boot loader locates and loads a default IOS operating system software 
  image into memory and gives control of the switch over to the IOS.
 
 2 - Configuring Basic Switch Management Access with IPv4
  Step 1. Configure Management Interface
  An IPv4 address and subnet mask is configured on the management SVI of the switch from VLAN interface configuration mode.
  Step 2. Configure Default Gateway
  Step 3. Verify Configuration
  
  Duplex and Speed
  Use the duplex interface configuration mode command to manually specify the duplex mode for a switch port. 
  Use the speed interface configuration mode command to manually specify the speed for a switch port.
 
 3 - Network Access Layer Issues
  The reported input errors from the show interfaces command include the following:
  Runt Frames - Ethernet frames that are shorter than the 64-byte minimum allowed length are called runts. 
  Malfunctioning NICs are the usual cause of excessive runt frames, but they can also be caused by collisions.
  Giants - Ethernet frames that are larger than the maximum allowed size are called giants.
  CRC errors - On Ethernet and serial interfaces, CRC errors usually indicate a media or cable error. 
  Common causes include electrical interference, loose or damaged connections, or incorrect cabling. 
  If you see many CRC errors, there is too much noise on the link and you should inspect the cable.
  Collisions - Collisions in half-duplex operations are normal. 
  However, you should never see collisions on an interface configured for full-duplex communication.
  Late collisions - A late collision refers to a collision that occurs after 512 bits of the frame have been transmitted. 
  Excessive cable lengths are the most common cause of late collisions. Another common cause is duplex misconfiguration.
 
 4 - Configuring SSH
  Step 1. Verify SSH support.
  Use the show ip ssh command to verify that the switch supports SSH
  Step 2. Configure the IP domain.
  Configure the IP domain name of the network using the ip domain-name domain-name
  Step 3. Generate RSA key pairs.
  Use the crypto key generate rsa global configuration mode command
  Step 4. Configure user authentication.
  To use the local authentication method, create a username and password pair using the username username secret password  
  Step 5. Configure the vty lines.
  line vty 0 14
  Enable the SSH protocol on the vty lines using the transport input ssh
  login local line configuration mode command to require local authentication for SSH 
  Step 6. Enable SSH version 2.
  Enable SSH version using the ip ssh version 2 global configuration command.
  
  Disable Unused Ports
  Switch(config)# interface range type module/first-number – last-number
  shutdown
  
 5 - Port Security
  Port security limits the number of valid MAC addresses allowed on a port.
  The type of secure address is based on the configuration and includes:
  Static secure MAC addresses - MAC addresses that are manually configured on a port by 
  using the switchport port-security mac-address mac-address  
  Dynamic secure MAC addresses - MAC addresses that are dynamically learned and stored only in the address table. 
  MAC addresses configured in this way are removed when the switch restarts.
  Sticky secure MAC addresses - MAC addresses that can be dynamically learned or manually configured, 
  then stored in the address table and added to the running configuration.
  
  Port Security: Violation Modes
  Protect - When the number of secure MAC addresses reaches the limit allowed on the port, packets with unknown source addresses are dropped
  There is no notification that a security violation has occurred.
  
  Restrict - When the number of secure MAC addresses reaches the limit allowed on the port, packets with unknown source addresses are dropped
  In this mode, there is a notification that a security violation has occurred.
  
  Shutdown - In this (default) mode, a port security violation causes the interface to immediately become error-disabled and turns off the port LED.
  it can be brought out of this state by entering the shutdown interface configuration mode command followed by the no shutdown command.
 
  To change the violation mode on a switch port, use the switchport port-security violation {protect | restrict | shutdown}
  
  
VI. VLANs
  Within a switched network, VLANs provide segmentation and organizational flexibility. 
  VLANs provide a way to group devices within a LAN. A group of devices within a VLAN communicate as if each device was attached to the same cable. 
  VLANs are based on logical connections, instead of physical connections.
  VLANs allow an administrator to segment networks based on factors such as function, project team, or application, without regard for the physical 
  location of the user or device. Each VLAN is considered a separate logical network. 
  Devices within a VLAN act as if they are in their own independent network, even if they share a common infrastructure with other VLANs.
  A VLAN creates a logical broadcast domain that can span multiple physical LAN segments. 
  
 1 - Benefits of VLANs
  Security, Cost reduction, Better performance, Reduce the size of broadcast domains, Improved IT staff efficiency   
  Simpler project and application management 
  
  Each VLAN in a switched network corresponds to an IP network.
 
 2 - Types of VLANs
  Data VLAN
  A data VLAN is a VLAN that is configured to carry user-generated traffic. 
  A VLAN carrying voice or management traffic would not be a data VLAN. 
  It is common practice to separate voice and management traffic from data traffic.  
  
  Default VLAN
  All switch ports become a part of the default VLAN after the initial boot up of a switch loading the default configuration. 
  Switch ports that participate in the default VLAN are part of the same broadcast domain. 
  This allows any device connected to any switch port to communicate with other devices on other switch ports. 
  The default VLAN for Cisco switches is VLAN 1.
  
  Native VLAN
  A native VLAN is assigned to an 802.1Q trunk port. 
  Trunk ports are the links between switches that support the transmission of traffic associated with more than one VLAN. 
  An 802.1Q trunk port supports traffic coming from many VLANs (tagged traffic), as well as traffic that does not come from a VLAN 
  (untagged traffic). Tagged traffic refers to traffic that has a 4-byte tag inserted within the original Ethernet frame header, 
  specifying the VLAN to which the frame belongs. The 802.1Q trunk port places untagged traffic on the native VLAN, which by default is VLAN 1.
  
  Management VLAN
  A management VLAN is any VLAN configured to access the management capabilities of a switch. 
  VLAN 1 is the management VLAN by default. To create the management VLAN, the switch virtual interface (SVI) of that VLAN 
  is assigned an IP address and a subnet mask, allowing the switch to be managed via HTTP, Telnet, SSH, or SNMP.
  
  A separate VLAN is needed to support Voice over IP (VoIP). VoIP traffic requires:
  Assured bandwidth to ensure voice quality
  Transmission priority over other types of network traffic
  Ability to be routed around congested areas on the network
  Delay of less than 150 ms across the network
  
 3 - VLAN Trunks
  A trunk is a point-to-point link between two network devices that carries more than one VLAN. 
  A VLAN trunk extends VLANs across an entire network. 
  Cisco supports IEEE 802.1Q for coordinating trunks on Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, and 10-Gigabit Ethernet interfaces. 
  
 4 - VLAN Ranges on Catalyst Switches
  Normal Range VLANs
  Identified by a VLAN ID between 1 and 1005.
  IDs 1 and 1002 to 1005 are automatically created and cannot be removed.
  Configurations are stored within a VLAN database file, called vlan.dat. 
  The vlan.dat file is located in the flash memory of the switch.
  The VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP), which helps manage VLAN configurations between switches, 
  can only learn and store normal range VLANs.
  
  Extended Range VLANs
  Enable service providers to extend their infrastructure to a greater number of customers.
  Are identified by a VLAN ID between 1006 and 4094.
  Configurations are not written to the vlan.dat file.
  Support fewer VLAN features than normal range VLANs.
  Saved, by default, in the running configuration file.
  VTP does not learn extended range VLANs.
  
 5 - Creating VLANs and assigning ports to VLANs
  create vlans in global configuration mode
  vlan VLAN-ID
  name NAME
  
  Assign interfaces:
  interface TYPE/ID
  switchport mode access
  switchport access vlan ID
  
  Use the switchport voice vlan vlan-# interface configuration command to assign a voice VLAN to a port.
  LANs supporting voice traffic typically also have Quality of Service (QoS) enabled.
  Voice traffic must be labeled as trusted as soon as it enters the network.
  Use the: mls qos trust[cos | device cisco-phone | dscp | ip-precedence] 
  interface configuration command to set the trusted state of an interface, and to indicate which fields of the packet are used to classify traffic.
  
  Entire vlan.dat file can be deleted using the delete flash:vlan.dat
  For a Catalyst switch, the erase startup-config command must accompany the delete vlan.dat
 
 6 - Configuring Trunk Ports
  interface TYPE-ID
  switchport mode trunk                ---   required
  switchport trunk native vlan ID      ---   optional
  switchport trunk allowed vlan IDs    ---   optional
  switchport nonegotiate               ---   Disable DTP and auto trunk negotiation
 
 7 - Inter vlan routing
  There are three options for inter-VLAN routing:
  
  Legacy inter-VLAN routing
  Historically, the first solution for inter-VLAN routing relied on routers with multiple physical interfaces. 
  Each interface had to be connected to a separate network and configured with a distinct subnet.
  
  Router-on-a-Stick
  Router-on-a-stick’ is a type of router configuration in which a single physical 
  interface routes traffic between multiple VLANs on a network.
  Router subinterfaces:
  interface gig0/0
  no ip address
  interface gig0/0.10
  encapsulation dot1q VLAN-ID
  ip address IP MASK
  
  Layer 3 switching using SVIs
 
 
VII. Access control lists
  An ACL is a series of IOS commands that control whether a router forwards or drops packets 
  based on information found in the packet header.
 
  Inbound ACLs - Incoming packets are processed before they are routed to the outbound interface.
  Outbound ACLs - Incoming packets are routed to the outbound interface, and then they are processed through the outbound ACL.
  
  Wildcard mask example
  mask = 255.255.255.0
  full-mask = 255.255.255.255
  wildcard-mask = full-mask - mask = 0.0.0.255
  
  Rules for Applying ACLs
  One ACL per protocol
  One ACL per direction
  One ACL per interface
 
 1 - Where to Place ACLs
  Extended ACLs - Locate extended ACLs as close as possible to the source of the traffic to be filtered. 
  Standard ACLs - Because standard ACLs do not specify destination addresses, place them as close to the destination as possible.
  
  Numbered Standard IPv4 ACL Syntax
  Router(config)# access-list access-list-number { deny | permit | remark } source [ source-wildcard ][ log ]  
  example:
  R1(config)# access-list 10 permit host 192.168.10.10
  R1(config)# access-list 10 permit 192.168.10.10 0.0.0.0
  R1(config)# access-list 10 permit 192.168.10.0 0.0.0.255
  
  Named Standard IPv4 ACL Syntax
  R1(config)#ip access-list [standard | extended] name
  R1(config-std-nacl)#ID [permit | deny | remark] {source wildcard-mask} [log]
  example:
  R1(config)#ip access-list standard test-acl
  R1(config-std-nacl)#10 permit 192.168.1.0 0.0.0.255
  R1(config-std-nacl)#15 deny 10.0.0.0 0.0.0.255
  R1(config-std-nacl)#20 permit host 172.16.1.1
  
  Applying ACL to interface
  Router(config-if)# ip access-group { access-list-number | access-list-name } { in | out }
  Applying ACL for SSH/Telnet access (vty)
  access-class { access-list-number | access-list-name } { in | out }
  
  During testing of an ACL, the counters can be cleared using the clear access-list counters command.
  
  !! At the end of every access list there is Implicit Deny Any !!
  
  
VIII.  DHCP
  DHCPv4 assigns IPv4 addresses and other network configuration information dynamically. 
  A dedicated DHCPv4 server is scalable and relatively easy to manage. 
  However, in a small branch or SOHO location, a Cisco router can be configured to provide DHCPv4 services without the need for a dedicated server.  
  
 1 - DHCPv4 Operation
  Lease Origination
  
  DHCP Discover (DHCPDISCOVER)
  The DHCPDISCOVER message finds DHCPv4 servers on the network. 
  Because the client has no valid IPv4 information at bootup, it uses Layer 2 and Layer 3 broadcast addresses to communicate with the server.
  
  DHCP Offer (DHCPOFFER)
  When the DHCPv4 server receives a DHCPDISCOVER message, it reserves an available IPv4 address to lease to the client.
  The server also creates an ARP entry consisting of the MAC address of the requesting client and the leased IPv4 address of the client.
  
  DHCP Request (DHCPREQUEST)
  When the client receives the DHCPOFFER from the server, it sends back a DHCPREQUEST 
  This message is used for both lease origination and lease renewal.
  When used for lease origination, the DHCPREQUEST serves as a binding acceptance notice to the selected server for the parameters 
  it has offered and an implicit decline to any other servers that may have provided the client a binding offer.
  
  DHCP Acknowledgment (DHCPACK)
  On receiving the DHCPREQUEST message, the server verifies the lease information with an ICMP ping 
  to that address to ensure it is not being used already, creates a new ARP entry for the client lease, and replies with a DHCPACK 
  
  Lease Renewal
  Before the lease expires, the client sends a DHCPREQUEST message directly to the DHCPv4 server that originally offered the IPv4 address.
  On receiving the DHCPREQUEST message, the server verifies the lease information by returning a DHCPACK
 
 2 - Configuring a Basic DHCPv4 Server
  Step 1. Excluding IPv4 Addresses
  To exclude specific addresses, use the ip dhcp excluded-address
  Step 2. Configuring a DHCPv4 Pool
  The ip dhcp pool pool-name command creates a pool with the specified name and puts the router in DHCPv4 configuration mode
  Step 3. Configuring Specific Tasks
  Use the network statement to define the range of available addresses.
  Use the default-router command to define the default gateway router.
  DNS server that is available to a DHCPv4 client is configured using the dns-server command.
  The duration of the DHCPv4 lease can be changed using the lease command.
  
  The DHCPv4 service is enabled, by default. To disable the service, use the no service dhcp global configuration mode command. 
  Use the service dhcp global configuration mode command to re-enable the DHCPv4 server process.
  DHCPv4 can be verified using the show ip dhcp binding command.
  
 3 - DHCPv4 Relay
  To forward DHCP broadcast messages to the server (when the dhcp server is not inside the local segment)
  Interface on the router receiving the broadcast is configured with the ip helper-address interface configuration mode command. 
  The address of the DHCPv4 server is configured as the only parameter.
  
 4 - DHCPv6 and SLAAC
  There are two methods in which IPv6 global unicast addresses can be assigned dynamically:
  
  Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC) 
  SLAAC is a method in which a device can obtain an IPv6 global unicast address without the services of a DHCPv6 server.
  At the core of SLAAC is ICMPv6. ICMPv6 is similar to ICMPv4 but includes additional functionality and is a much more robust protocol.
  SLAAC uses ICMPv6 Router Solicitation and Router Advertisement messages to provide addressing and other configuration information 
  that would normally be provided by a DHCP server:
   Router Solicitation (RS) message - When a client is configured to obtain its addressing information automatically using SLAAC, 
   the client sends an RS message to the router. 
   The RS message is sent to the IPv6 all-routers multicast address FF02::2.
   Router Advertisement (RA) message - RA messages are sent by routers to provide addressing information to clients configured 
   to obtain their IPv6 addresses automatically.
   The RA message includes the prefix and prefix length of the local segment
   Example:
   PC1 receives the RA message containing the prefix and prefix length for the local network. 
   PC1 will use this information to create its own IPv6 global unicast address. PC1 now has a 64-bit network prefix, 
   but needs a 64-bit Interface ID (IID) to create a global unicast address.
   There are two ways PC1 can create its own unique IID:
   EUI-64 - Using the EUI-64 process, PC1 will create an IID using its 48-bit MAC address.
   Randomly generated - The 64-bit IID can be a random number generated by the client operating system
   
   Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (Stateful DHCPv6)
   Configuring a Router as a Stateless DHCPv6 Server
    Step 1. Enable IPv6 Routing
    Step 2. Configure a DHCPv6 Pool
    Step 3. Configure Pool Parameters
	dns-server DNS
	domain-name DOMAIN
	Step 4. Configure the DHCPv6 Interface
	interface type-number
	ipv6 dhcp server pool-name
	ipv6 nd other-config-flag

   Configuring a Router as a Stateful DHCPv6 Server
	Step 1. Enable IPv6 Routing
    Step 2. Configure a DHCPv6 Pool
	Step 3. Configure Pool Parameters
	address predix prefix/length lifetime infinite
	Step 4. Interface Commands
	ipv6 dhcp server pool-name
	ipv6 nd managed-config-flag
	
	
	
   The decision of whether a client is configured to obtain its IPv6 address information automatically using SLAAC, DHCPv6, or a 
   combination of both depends on the settings within the RA message.The decision of whether a client is configured to obtain 
   its IPv6 address information automatically using SLAAC, DHCPv6, or a combination of both depends on the settings within the RA message.
   The two flags are the Managed Address Configuration flag (M flag) and the Other Configuration flag (O flag).
   Using different combinations of the M and O flags, RA messages have one of three addressing options
   
   SLAAC (Router Advertisement only)
   SLAAC is the default option on Cisco routers. Both the M flag and the O flag are set to 0 in the RA
   To re-enable an interface for SLAAC
   Router(config-if)# no ipv6 nd managed-config-flag 
   Router(config-if)# no ipv6 nd other-config-flag 
   
   Stateless DHCPv6 (Router Advertisement and DHCPv6)
   The stateless DHCPv6 option informs the client to use the information in the RA message for addressing, 
   but additional configuration parameters are available from a DHCPv6 server.
   For stateless DHCPv6, the O flag is set to 1 and the M flag is left at the default setting of 0
   To modify the RA message sent on the interface of a router to indicate stateless DHCPv6
   Router(config-if)# ipv6 nd other-config-flag 
    
   Stateful DHCPv6 (DHCPv6 only)
   RA message informs the client not to use the information in the RA message. 
   All addressing information and configuration information must be obtained from a stateful DHCPv6 server.
   The following command is used to change the M flag from 0 to 1 to signify stateful DHCPv6:
   Router(config-if)# ipv6 nd managed-config-flag 
 
   Configuring the DHCPv6 Relay Agent
   DHCPv6 relay agent is configured using the ipv6 dhcp relay destination command.
   The show ipv6 dhcp interface command verifies the interface is in relay mode
 
 
IX. NAT for IPv4
  All public IPv4 addresses that transverse the Internet must be registered with a Regional Internet Registry (RIR).
  Organizations can lease public addresses from a service provider.
  The registered holder of a public IP address can assign that address to a network device.  
  Networks are commonly implemented using private IPv4 addresses, as defined in RFC 1918.
  10.0.0.0/8
  172.16.0.0/12
  192.168.0.0/16
 
  NAT includes four types of addresses:
  Inside local address
  Inside global address
  Outside local address
  Outside global address
  
  Inside address - The address of the device which is being translated by NAT.
  Outside address - The address of the destination device.
  Local address - A local address is any address that appears on the inside portion of the network.
  Global address - A global address is any address that appears on the outside portion of the network.
 
 1 - Types of NAT
  There are three types of NAT translation:
  Static address translation (static NAT) - One-to-one address mapping between local and global addresses.
  Dynamic address translation (dynamic NAT) - Many-to-many address mapping between local and global addresses. 
  Port Address Translation (PAT) - Many-to-one address mapping between local and global addresses. This method is also known as overloading (NAT overloading). 
  
  Disadvantages of NAT
  performance is defgraded
  end-to-end functionality is degraded
  end-to-end IP traceability is lost
  tunneling becomes more complex
  initiating tcp connections can be distrupted
  
 2 - Configuring NAT
 
  Static NAT
  ip nat inside source static local-ip global-ip
  interface type-number                ## inside interface (facing the local network)
  ip nat inside
  interface type-number                ## outside interface (facing the ISP)
  ip nat outside
 
  Dynamic NAT
  ip nat pool name start-ip end-ip netmask MASK             # create nat pool
  access-list NUMBER permit source wild-mask                # access list for permited private IPs for Native
  ip nat inside source list ACL pool NAME
  ip nat inside
  ip nat outside
 
  PAT (NAT overloading)
  ip nat pool NAME start-IP end-IP netmask MASK
  access list NUMBER permit source wild-mask
  ip nat inside source list ACL pool NAME overload            # overload key word designate NAT overloading
  ip nat inside source list ACL interface Type-num overload   # configure PAT for single public IP
  ip nat inside
  ip nat outside
 
  
  ip nat inside source static tcp/udp local-ip local-port global-ip global-port extendable
  # configuration for port forwarding
 
  show ip nat translations
  show ip nat statistics
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 