CCNA - 3
I. LAN DESIGN

 1 - All Enterprise networks must:
  Support crtitical applications
  Support converged network traffic
  Support diverse business needs
  Provide centralized administrative control
  
 2 - Hierarchical Design Model
  Core Layer (Core routerts/switches along with the EDGE router and/or any firewall devices/services)
  Distribution Layer (aggregate access layers and provde connectivity to services)
  Access Layer (provides end users with connectivity usually trough common switches)
  
  Two-layer model (Core and distribution are collapsed into one layer to reduce complexity and costs)

 3 - Ether Channel
  link aggregation technique which combine multiple Ethernet links into single load-balanced Ether Channel
  to increase available bandwith.
  
 4 - Failure domain
  Area of a network that is impacted when a critical device or network service experiences problems 
  
 5 - Power over Ethernet
  PoE allows the switch to deliver power to a device over the existing Ethernet cabling.
  
 6 - Managment
  Out-of-band management is used for initial configuration or when a network connection is unavailable
  In-band management is used to monitor and make configuration changes to a network device over a network connection. 
  
  
II. SCALING VLANs

 1 - VTP (vlan trunking protocol) - Cisco-proprietary 
  It reduces administration in a switched network. A switch in VTP server mode can manage additions
  , deletions and renaming of VLANs across the domain. For example, when a new VLAN is added on the VTP server
  , the VLAN information is distributed to all switches in the domain.
  VTP stores VLAN configurations in a database called vlan.dat located in the flash
  
 2 - VTP modes
  VTP server : 
  Advertises the VTP domain VLAN information to other VTP-enabled switches in the same VTP domain
  Stores the VLAN information for the entire domain in NVRAM
  Creates, deletes, or renames VLANs for the domain
  Default VTP mode
  
  VTP client :
  Cannot create, change, or delete VLANs
  Stores the VLAN information for the entire domain in RAM
  Must be configured as VTP client
  
  VTP transparent :
  Does not participate in VTP except to forward VTP advertisements to VTP clients and VTP server
  VLANs that are created, renamed, or deleted on transparent switches are local to that switch only
  Must be configured as VTP transparent
  
  VTP includes three types of advertisements:
  Summary advertisements - These inform adjacent switches of VTP domain name and configuration revision number.
  Advertisement request - These are in response to a summary advertisement message when the summary advertisement 
  contains a higher configuration revision number than the current value.
  Subset advertisements - These contain VLAN information including any changes.
  
  By default, Cisco switches issue summary advertisements every five minutes.
  
 3 - CAVEEATS
  Adding a VTP-enabled switch to an existing VTP domain will wipe out the existing VLAN configurations 
  in the domain if the new switch is configured with different 
  VLANs and has a higher configuration revision number than the existing VTP server
  
  To reset VTP configuration revision number to zero:
  Change the switch's VTP domain to a nonexistent 
  VTP domain and then change the domain back to the original name.
  
  Change the switch's VTP mode to transparent and then back to previous VTP mode.
  
 4 - VTP SERVER CONFIG                      DTP Modes
  show vtp status                    dynamic desirable - active trunking attempts   
  vtp mode server                    dynamic auto - passive trunking attempts
  vtp domain DOMAIN_NAME             nonegotiate - disable dtp
  vtp password PASS
  
 5 - DTP (Dynamic trunking protocol)
  Cisco proprietary protocol that is automatically enabled on Catalyst 2960 and Catalyst 3560 Series switches.
  Turn off DTP on interfaces on a Cisco switch connected to devices that do not support DTP to avoid missconfigurations
  switchport nonegotiate
  
  Negotiated Interface Modes
  
  switchport mode dynamic auto - The interface becomes a trunk interface if the neighboring interface is set to trunk or desirable mode.
  The default switchport mode for all Ethernet interfaces is dynamic auto.
  
  switchport mode dynamic desirable - Makes the interface actively attempt to convert the link to a trunk link.
  The interface becomes a trunk interface if the neighboring interface is set to trunk, desirable, or dynamic auto mode.
  
  show dtp interface
  
III. STP - Spanning tree protocol
 
 1 - Redundancy problem considerations all caussed by layer 2 loops.
  MAC Database Instability   
  Broadcast Storms                  
  Multiple frame transmission
 
  Spanning Tree Algorithm - STP ensures that there is only one logical path between all destinations on the network 
  by intentionally blocking redundant paths that could cause a loop
  
  Root Bridge - Swtich to all other switched refer for path calculations of the STP instance
  Election of root bridge - All switches in the broadcast domain participate in the election process. 
  After a switch boots, it begins to send out BPDU frames every two seconds. 
  These BPDUs contain the switch BID and the root ID.
  The switch with the lowest BID will become the root bridge.
  The default is 32,768. If two or more switches have the same priority, 
  the switch with the lowest MAC address will become the root bridge.
  
  Bridge ID = Priority and MAC Address
  
  Best path is choosed as sum of the costs of paths to the root briddge. Cost can be chaanged
  for interface with interface config mode command - spanning-tree cost COST
  
  STP port roles - 
  Root Port - port which is closest to the root bridge
  Designated Port - All non-root ports that are still permitted to forward traffic on the network
  Alternate Port - Alternate ports and backup ports are in discarding or blocking state to prevent loops
  
 2 - Types of Spanning Tree Protocols
  STP - Legacy Common Spanning Tree 
  (CST) assumes one spanning tree instance for the entire bridged network, regardless of the number of VLANs. 
  
  PVST+ - This is a Cisco enhancement of STP that provides a separate 802.1D spanning tree instance 
  for each VLAN configured in the network. Port states for PVST
   Blocking - The port is an alternate port and does not participate in frame forwarding. 
   Listening - Listens for the path to the root. 
   STP has determined that the port can participate in frame forwarding according to the BPDU frames that the switch has received
   Learning - Learns the MAC addresses. 
   The port prepares to participate in frame forwarding and begins to populate the MAC address table.
   Forwarding - The port is considered part of the active topology.
   Disabled - The Layer 2 port does not participate in spanning tree and does not forward frames.
  
  RSTP -  This is an evolution of STP that provides faster convergence than STP.
   Edge Port - An RSTP edge port is a switch port that is never intended to be connected to another switch.
   Simillar to PortFast on PVST. Configured with int command spanning-tree portfast
   Link Types - 
   Point-to-Point - A port operating in full-duplex mode typically connects a switch to a switch
   Shared - A port operating in half-duplex mode connects a switch to a hub that attaches multiple devices
  
  Rapid PVST+ - This is a Cisco enhancement of RSTP that uses PVST+. Rapid PVST+ provides a separate instance of 802.1w per VLAN.
  
  MSTP - maps multiple VLANs into the same spanning tree instance.
  
 3 - Switch stacking and spanning-tree
  A switch stack can consist of up to nine Catalyst 3750 switches connected through their StackWise ports
  All members are eligible masters. If the master becomes unavailable, 
  there is an automatic process to elect a new master from the remaining stack members
  The switch with the highest stack member priority value becomes the master.
  You can manage the stack through the same IP address even 
  if you remove the master or any other member from the stack.
  
  Commands
  show spanning-tree detail/summary/vlan ID - show info for spanning-tree
  spanning-tree VLAN ID root primary/secondary - configure root bridge manually
  spanning-tree portfast - to configure portfast on interface (int mode command)
  spanning-tree bpduguard enable  - enable bpdu guard on access port
  spanning-tree mode - choose the operation mode for stp (rstp, pvst+ , rapid pvst+, mstp)
  spanning-tree link-type - int command , point-to-point for rapid pvst+
  clear spanning-tree detected-protocols - clear all detected STP usage for rapid pvst+ config
  

IV. Ether Channel and HSRP
  The EtherChannel provides full-duplex bandwidth up to 800 Mb/s (Fast EtherChannel) 
  or 8 Gb/s (Gigabit EtherChannel) between one switch and another switch or host.
  All switches in the environment use the default root bridge priority of 32768. 
  If all switches have the same root bridge priority, the switch with the lowest MAC address will be elected as the root bridge
  
  
 1 - PAgP (Port Agregation Protocol) 
   Cisco proprietary protocol
   In EtherChannel, it is mandatory that all ports have the same speed, duplex setting, and VLAN information.
   
   PAgp Modes:
     On - This mode forces the interface to channel without PAgP. 
	Interfaces configured in the on mode do not exchange PAgP packets. 
	 PAgP desirable - This PAgP mode places an interface in an active negotiating state in which 
	the interface initiates negotiations with other interfaces by sending PAgP packets.
	 PAgP auto - This PAgP mode places an interface in a passive negotiating state in which the 
	interface responds to the PAgP packets that it receives, but does not initiate PAgP negotiation.
     
	PAgP packets are sent every 30 seconds.
 
 
 2 - LACP (Link Agregation Control Protocol)
   Open Standart Protocol
   Originally defined as IEEE 802.3ad
   LACP allows for eight active links, and also eight standby links. 
   A standby link will become active should one of the current active links fail.
   
   LACP modes:
     On - This mode forces the interface to channel without LACP. 
	Interfaces configured in the on mode do not exchange LACP packets.
	 LACP active - This LACP mode places a port in an active negotiating state. 
	In this state, the port initiates negotiations with other ports by sending LACP packets.
	 LACP passive - This LACP mode places a port in a passive negotiating state. 
	In this state, the port responds to the LACP packets that it receives, but does not initiate LACP packet negotiation.
	
  Commands
  show etherchannel summary/detail
  show interface port-channel ID
  interface range ID-ID                                       ## first ceate the ether channel iface
  channel-group ID mode MODE (active/passive/on/desirable)
  interface port-channel ID                                    
  switchport mode trunk/acces                                 ## make the interface config after
  switchport ....  
	
	
 3 - HSRP (Hot standby router protocol)
   Cisco-proprietary
   By sharing an IP address and a MAC address, two or more routers can act as a single virtual router.
   The ability of a network to dynamically recover from the failure of a device 
   acting as a default gateway is known as first-hop redundancy.   

   The router with the highest HSRP priority will become the active router. By default, the HSRP priority is 100. 
   If the priorities are equal, the router with the numerically highest IPv4 address is elected as the active router.
   Also this is the default option.
	
  Commands
  show standby /brief
  standby version 2                                            ## In interface mode
  standby GROUP-ID ip IP-ADDR                                  ## config virtual IP gr-id 0-10
  standby GROUP-ID priority VALUE                              ## config priority 0-255 for active router
  standby G-ID preempt                                         ## Start preemtion process for new active router
 
  Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol version 2 (VRRPv2) - A non-proprietary election protocol
  Gateway Load Balancing Protocol (GLBP) - Cisco-proprietary FHRP that protects data traffic from a failed router or circuit, 
  like HSRP and VRRP, while also allowing load balancing
  
 
V. Dynamic Routing overview

 1 - Protocol classes
    Distance vector protocols
   A router using a distance vector routing protocol does not have the knowledge of the entire path to a destination network
   Distance vector routing protocols do not have a map of the network topology like other types of routing protocols do.
   Rip, EIGRP
   RIP uses the Bellman-Ford algorithm as its routing algorithm.
   IGRP and EIGRP use the Diffusing Update Algorithm (DUAL) routing algorithm
 
    Link-state protocols
   Router configured with a link-state routing protocol can create a complete view or topology 
   of the network by gathering information from all of the other routers. 
   Link-state routing protocols do not use periodic updates,  a link-state update is only sent when there is a change in the topology.
   OSPF, IS-IS
    Link-state process:
   Each router learns about its own links and its own directly connected networks.
   Each router is responsible for sending Hello messages to neighbors on directly connected networks
   Each router builds a Link-State Packet (LSP) containing the state of each directly connected link (LSP - neighbor ID, link type, and bandwidth)
   Each router floods the LSP to all neighbors. Those neighbors store all LSPs received in a database.
   Each router uses the database to construct a complete map of the topology 
   and computes the best path to each destination network
     
   
 2 - Protocol characteristics
 
   RIPv2 
   Classless routing protocol - It supports VLSM and CIDR, because it includes the subnet mask in the routing updates.
   Increased efficiency - It forwards updates to multicast address 224.0.0.9, instead of the broadcast address 255.255.255.255. 
   Reduced routing entries - It supports manual route summarization on any interface.
   Secure - It supports an authentication mechanism to secure routing table updates between neighbors. 
 
   EIGRP
   Bounded triggered updates - It does not send periodic updates. Only routing table changes are propagated
   Hello keepalive mechanism - A small Hello message is periodically exchanged to maintain adjacencies with neighboring routers.
   Maintains a topology table - Maintains all the routes received from neighbors (not only the best paths) in a topology table. 
   DUAL can insert backup routes into the EIGRP topology table   
   Rapid convergence - In most cases, it is the fastest IGP to converge because it maintains alternate routes, enabling almost instantaneous convergence
   Multiple network layer protocol support - EIGRP uses Protocol Dependent Modules (PDM), 
   which means that it is the only protocol to include support for protocols other than IPv4 and IPv6, such as legacy IPX and AppleTalk. 
 
   OSPF
   Based on  Edsger Dijkstra's shortest path first (SPF) algorithm.
   This algorithm uses accumulated costs along each path, 
   from source to destination, to determine the total cost of a route.
 
 3 - Aditional information missed on test
   Information such as sequence numbers and aging information is included in an LSP to help manage the flooding process. 
   This information can assist a router in determining if it has already received the LSP from another router 
   or if the LSP has newer information than what is already contained in the link-state database.
 
   Link-state protocols have the following disadvantages:
   Memory Requirements - Creating and maintaining the link-state database and SPF tree.
   Processing Requirements - The SPF algorithm requires more CPU time than distance vector algorithms because link-state protocols build a complete map of the topology.
   Bandwidth Requirements - Link-state packet flooding can adversely affect the available bandwidth on a network.
 
 
VI. EIGRP (Enchanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol)

 1 - EIGRP features
   Diffusing Update Algorithm
   Using DUAL, EIGRP stores all available backup routes for destinations so that it can quickly adapt to alternate routes when necessary. 
 
   Establishing Neighbor Adjacencies
   EIGRP establishes relationships with directly connected routers that are also enabled for EIGRP
   
   Reliable Transport Protocol
   The Reliable Transport Protocol (RTP) is unique to EIGRP and provides delivery of EIGRP packets to neighbors. 
   RTP and the tracking of neighbor adjacencies set the stage for DUAL
 
   Partial and Bounded Updates
   EIGRP uses the terms partial and bounded when referring to its updates. 
   Unlike RIP, EIGRP does not send periodic updates and route entries do not age out.
   
   Equal and Unequal Cost Load Balancing
   EIGRP supports equal cost load balancing and unequal cost load balancing, which allows administrators to better distribute traffic flow in their networks.
   EIgrp multicast address 224.0.0.10
 
 
   Protocol Dependent Modules  (PDMs)
   PDMs are responsible for the specific routing tasks for each network layer protocol, including:
   Maintaining the neighbor and topology tables of EIGRP routers that belong to that protocol suite
   Building and translating protocol-specific packets for DUAL
   Interfacing DUAL to the protocol-specific routing table
   Computing the metric and passing this information to DUAL
   Implementing filtering and access lists
   Performing redistribution functions to and from other routing protocols
   Redistributing routes that are learned by other routing protocols
   
 2 - EIGRP packet types
   Hello packets - Used for neighbor discovery and to maintain neighbor adjacencies.
   Update packets - Propagates routing information to EIGRP neighbors.
   Acknowledgment packets - Used to acknowledge the receipt of an EIGRP message that was sent using reliable delivery.
   Query packets - Used to query routes from neighbors.
   Reply packets - Sent in response to an EIGRP query.
   
 3 - EIGRP composite metrics (k1, k3)
   By default, EIGRP uses the following values in its composite metric to calculate the preferred path to a network:
   Bandwidth - The slowest bandwidth among all of the outgoing interfaces, along the path from source to destination. 
   Delay - The cumulative (sum) of all interface delay along the path (in tens of microseconds)   
   
 4 - DUAL concepts
   Successor - neighboring router that is used for packet forwarding and is the least-cost route to the destination network
   Feasible Distance (FD) - lowest calculated metric to reach the destination network
   Feasible Successor (FS) - neighbor that has a loop-free backup path to the same network as the successor, and it satisfies the Feasibility Condition
   Reported Distance (RD)  -  EIGRP neighbor’s feasible distance to the same destination network
   Feasible Condition (FC) -  neighbor’s Reported Distance (RD) to a network is less than the local router’s feasible distance to the same destination network
   
 
 
   All routes in the topology table should be in the passive state for a stable routing domain. 
   EIGRP for IPv6 uses a different method to enable an interface for EIGRP. 
   Instead of using the network router configuration mode command to specify matching interface addresses, EIGRP for IPv6 is configured directly on the interface
 
   Router(config-if)# ipv6 eigrp autonomous-system 
 
   Commands:
   router eigrp AS(ID)
   eigrp router-id IP
   network NET                   # Can be classfull network to enable on our interfaces for clasless net use wild mask
   passive-interface IFACE       # Can be used to prevent the neighbor adjacencies and receiveing of routing updates.
   show ip eigrp topology        # Check the EIGRP topology table
 
VII. EIGRP tunning and troubleshooting
 1 - EIGRP auto summary
   Disabled by default from ios 12 onward, typicaly enabled on border or edge routers, can cause some drawbacks.
   Using the Null0 interface, the packet is discarded if no longer match is found , to prevent routing loops
   A summary route on R2 for 172.16.0.0/16 to the Null0 interface discards any packets 
   that begin with 172.16.x.x and that do not have a longer match with any of the subnets: 
   172.16.1.0/24, 172.16.2.0/24, or 172.16.3.0/24.  
 
 2 - Propagate Default Router
   One method of propagating a default static route within the EIGRP routing domain is by using the redistribute static command.
   This command tells EIGRP to include static routes in its EIGRP updates to other routers.
   Important symbols:
   D - This route was learned from an EIGRP routing update.
   * - The route is a candidate for a default route.
   EX - The route is an external EIGRP route, in this case a static route outside of the EIGRP routing domain.
   
 3 - EIGRP bandwith utilization
   By default, EIGRP uses only up to 50 percent of an interface’s bandwidth for EIGRP information. 
   Use the ip bandwidth-percent eigrp command to configure the percentage of bandwidth that can be used by EIGRP on an interface.    
   
 4 - Hello and Hold Timers
   EIGRP uses a lightweight Hello protocol to establish and monitor the connection status of its neighbor.
   The hold time tells the router the maximum time that the router should wait to receive 
   the next Hello before declaring that neighbor as unreachable.    
   
 5 - Load Balancing
   Equal-cost load balancing is the ability of a router to distribute outbound traffic using all interfaces   
   that have the same metric from the destination address. 
   The show ip protocols command can be used to verify the number of equal-cost paths currently configured on the router.  
   Unequal-Cost Load Balancing  balance traffic across multiple routes that have different metrics.
   Setting a value using the variance command in router configuration mode enables EIGRP to install 
   multiple loop-free routes with unequal cost in a local routing table. 
   FD (of the FS) <= FD (of the S) * variance  
   FD – feasible distance
   FS – feasible successor
   S – successor
     
  Commands:
  redistribute statuc                                        # Propagate default route
  ip bandwidth-percent eigrp AS PERCENT                      # configure the percentage of bandwidth that can be used by EIGRP
  ip hello-interval eigrp AS SEC                             # config Hello interval # per interface
  ip hold-time eigrp AS SEC
  maximum-paths value                                        # conf maximum path for equal load balanced
  variance                                                   # FD (of the FS) <= FD (of the S) * variance  
  trafﬁc-share balanced                                      # Trafﬁc is then distributed proportionately to the ratio of the costs.
  
 
VIII. OSPF (Open shortest path first) protocol
  OSPF version 2 (OSPFv2) is available for IPv4
  OSPF version 3 (OSPFv3) is available for IPv6. 
  The SPF algorithm creates an SPF tree by placing each router at the root of the tree and calculating the shortest path to each node.
  Single-Area OSPF - In Figure 1, all routers are in one area called the backbone area (area 0).
  Multiarea OSPF - In Figure 2, OSPF is implemented using multiple areas, in a hierarchal fashion. All areas must connect to the backbone area (area 0). 
  Routers interconnecting the areas are referred to as Area Border Routers (ABRs). 
  
  
 1 - OSPF features
   Classless - OSPFv2 is classless by design; therefore, it supports IPv4 VLSM and CIDR.
   Efficient - Routing changes trigger routing updates (no periodic updates). 
   It uses the SPF algorithm to choose the best path
   Fast convergence - It quickly propagates network changes.
   Scalable - It works well in small and large network sizes. 
   Routers can be grouped into areas to support a hierarchical system. 
   Secure - OSPFv2 supports Message Digest 5 (MD5) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) authentication.
   OSPFv3 uses Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) to add authentication for OSPFv3 packets.
   
   OSPFv2 multicast addresses, 224.0.0.5 or 224.0.0.6.
   
 2 - OSPF components
   Adjacency database - Creates the neighbor table.
   Link-state database (LSDB) - Creates the topology table. 
   Forwarding database - Creates the routing table
   
 3 - Link state operation
   Establish Neighbor Adjacencies - OSPF-enabled routers must recognize each other on the network before they can share information.
   Exchange Link-State Advertisements - After adjacencies are established, routers then exchange link-state advertisements (LSAs).
   Build the Topology Table - After LSAs are received, OSPF-enabled routers build the topology table (LSDB) based on the received LSAs.
   Execute the SPF Algorithm - Routers then execute the SPF algorithm.
 
 4 - Types of OSPF packets
   Hello packet - Used to establish and maintain adjacency with other OSPF routers.
   The default Hello interval on multiaccess networks is 10 seconds. 
   By default, the router Dead Interval is four times the Hello interval.   
   Database Description (DBD) packet - Contains an abbreviated list of the sending router’s 
   LSDB and is used by receiving routers to check against the local LSDB.
   Link-State Request (LSR) packet - Receiving routers can then request more information about any entry in the DBD by sending an LSR.
   Link-State Update (LSU) packet - Used to reply to LSRs and to announce new information.
   Link-State Acknowledgment (LSAck) packet
 
 5 - OSPF operational states
   Down State - NO hello packets are received. Interface is down
   Init State - Hello packets are received from neighbors
   Two-Way state - On ethernet links DR and BDR are elected     (designated router,backup designated router) 
   ExStart state - Master/Slave negotiation. Master start DBD packet exchange.
   Exchange state - Routers exchange DBD packets
   Loading state - LSRs LSUs are used to gain aditional information.
   Full state - all routes have converged
 
   Cost = reference bandwith / interface bandwith
   reference bandwith = 100 000 000  in bps   (100Mb/s)
 
   Diferences between OSPFv2 - OSPFv3
   Advertise networks -  ipv6 ospf process-id area area-id interface configuration command.
   
   Additional information missed on the test.
   The first preference for an OSPF router ID is an explicitly configured 32-bit address
   There may be several reasons why two routers running OSPF will fail to form an OSPF adjacency, including these:
    The subnet masks do not match, causing the routers to be on separate networks.
    OSPF Hello or Dead Timers do not match.
    OSPF network types do not match.
    There is a missing or incorrect OSPF network command.
   Since serial interfaces do not have MAC addresses, OSPFv3 automatically assigns a link-local address to them derived from the first available 
   MAC address from the pool of Ethernet interface addresses on the router. 
   Immediately after two OSPF routers have exchanged hello packets and have formed a neighbor adjacency
   They exchange abbreviated lists of their LSDBs.
 
 
   Commands:
   router ospf PID 
   network IP Wild-MASK area NUM
   router-id ID
   clear ip ospf process                                   # Reload OSPF process and form new adjacencies
   passive-interface INT
   auto-cost reference-bandwidth Mb/s                      # For reference bandwith adjusment
   ip ospf cost COST                                       # adjust cost per interface
   show ip ospf database                                   # show the ospf database
   
 
IX. OSPF multi-area implementation.
  OSPF single area issues:
  large routing table
  large link-state database
  frequent spf algorithm calculations
 
 LSAs are the building blocks of the OSPF LSDB. Individually, 
 they act as database records and provide specific OSPF network details.
 
 1 - OSPF two-layer area hierarchy
  Backbone (Transit) area - typically area 0 used to connect all other areas
  Regular (Non-backbone) area - Connects users and resources. 
  
 2 - Types of OSPF routers
  Internal router - all interfaces in same area
  Backbone router - routers in the backbone area
  Area border router - routers that have interfaces in more than 1 area (separate LSDBs for each area )
  Autonomous system boundary router - router that has at least one interface attached to an external internetwork.

 3 - Types of LSA messages
 
  type 1 -  routers advertise their directly connected OSPF-enabled links in a type 1 LSA,
  flooded only within the area in which they originated.  
 
  type 2 - only exists for multiaccess networks, they give other routers information 
  about multiaccess networks within the same area. Contains the router ID and IP address of the DR
 
  type 3 - used by ABRs to advertise networks from other areas.
  Receiving a type 3 LSA into an area does not cause a router to run the SPF algorithm.
  
  type 4 - Used to advertise the ASBR to other areas and provide path to it 
  generated by an ABR only when an ASBR exists within an area.
  
  type 5 -  describe routes to networks outside the OSPF routing domain. 
  Type 5 LSAs are originated by the ASBR and are flooded to the entire routing domain.
 
 4 - OSPF routing table entries
  O - Router (type 1) and network (type 2) LSAs describe the details within an area. 
  O IA - Summary LSAs appear in the routing table as IA (interarea routes).
  O E1/E2 - External LSAs appear in the routing table marked as external type (type 2 is default)
 
 
X. OSPF tunning and troubleshooting
 The router with the highest router id is elected as DR
 to change or modify the election process use the following commands: 
 ip ospf priority value    value can be from 0 to 255 (higher value = more priority, interface command)
 if priorities and IDs are the same highest loopback IPv4 address is choosen
 
 1 - OSPF network types
  Point-to-point - Two routers interconnected over a common link. 
   No other routers are on the link. This is often the configuration in WAN links.
  Broadcast multiaccess - Multiple routers interconnected over an Ethernet network.
  Nonbroadcast multiaccess (NBMA) - Multiple routers interconnected in a network that does not allow broadcasts, 
   such as Frame Relay
  Point-to-multipoint - Multiple routers interconnected in a hub-and-spoke topology over an NBMA network. 
   Often used to connect branch sites (spokes) to a central site
  Virtual links - Special OSPF network used to interconnect distant OSPF areas to the backbone area. 
   
 2- Propagating a Default Static Route in OSPF
  The default-information originate router configuration mode command. 
  This instructs R2 to be the source of the default route information and propagate the default static route in OSPF updates 
   
 3 - Modifying OSPFv2 Intervals
  OSPFv2 Hello and Dead intervals can be modified manually using the following interface configuration mode commands: 
    ip ospf hello-interval seconds
    ip ospf dead-interval seconds
  
 4 - Troubleshooting OSPF
  OSPF problems usually relate to: 
    Neighbor adjacencies
	  Another problem that may arise is when two neighboring routers have mismatched MTU sizes on their connecting interfaces.
	   ip mtu size interface configuration command
    Missing routes
    Path selection

  Missed on test
  On OSPF multiaccess networks, a DR is elected to be the collection and distribution point for LSAs sent and received. A BDR is also elected in case the DR fails. All other non-DR or BDR routers become DROTHER. Instead of flooding LSAs to all routers in the network, DROTHERs only send their LSAs to the DR and BDR using the multicast address 224.0.0.6. 
  If there is no DR/BDR election, the number of required adjacencies is n(n-1)/2 => 4(4-1)/2 = 6. With the election, this number is reduced to 3.​
   
  Only the full and 2way states indicate that a stable adjacency is formed.​ The loading, exstart, and exchange states are transitory states between the 2way and full states. 
   
 