I. Explore the network

  Networks come in all sizes. They can range from simple networks consisting of two computers to networks connecting millions of devices.
  Clients are computers with software installed that enable them to request and display the information obtained from the server.
  Client and server software usually runs on separate computers, but it is also possible for one computer to carry out both roles at the same time. 
  In small businesses and homes, many computers function as the servers and clients on the network. This type of network is called a peer-to-peer network. 
  
  Communication across a network is carried on a medium. The medium provides the channel over which the message travels from source to destination. 
  Metallic wires within cables - data is encoded into electrical impulses
  Glass or plastic fibers (fiber optic cable) - data is encoded as pulses of light
  Wireless transmission - data is encoded using wavelengths from the electromagnetic spectrum
  
  Types of Networks
  Local Area Network (LAN) - A network infrastructure that provides access to users and end devices in a small geographical area, 
   which is typically an enterprise, home, or small business network owned and managed by an individual or IT department. 
  Wide Area Network (WAN) - A network infrastructure that provides access to other networks over a wide geographical area, 
   which is typically owned and managed by a telecommunications service provider.
  Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) - A network infrastructure that spans a physical area larger than a LAN but smaller than a WAN (e.g., a city). 
   MANs are typically operated by a single entity such as a large organization.
  Wireless LAN (WLAN) - Similar to a LAN but wirelessly interconnects users and end points in a small geographical area.
  Storage Area Network (SAN) - A network infrastructure designed to support file servers and provide data storage, retrieval, and replication.
  
  Intranets and Extranets
  Intranet - Company only
  Extranet - Suppliers, Customers, Collaborators
  Internet - World
  
  Home users, teleworkers (remote workers), and small offices typically require a connection to an Internet Service Provider (ISP) to access the Internet. 
  Connection options vary greatly between ISP and geographical location. 
  However, popular choices include broadband cable, broadband digital subscriber line (DSL), wireless WANs, and mobile services.
  
  Internet connections
  
  Home and Small Office Internet Connections
  Cable - Typically offered by cable television service providers, the Internet data signal is carried on the same cable that delivers cable television. 
   It provides a high bandwidth, always on, connection to the Internet. 
  DSL - Digital Subscriber Lines provide a high bandwidth, always on, connection to the Internet. DSL runs over a telephone line. 
   In general, small office and home office users connect using Asymmetrical DSL (ADSL), which means that the download speed is faster than the upload speed.
  Cellular - Cellular Internet access uses a cell phone network to connect. Wherever you can get a cellular signal, you can get cellular Internet access. 
   Performance will be limited by the capabilities of the phone and the cell tower to which it is connected. 
  Satellite - The availability of satellite Internet access is a real benefit in those areas that would otherwise have no Internet connectivity at all.
   Satellite dishes require a clear line of sight to the satellite.
  Dial-up Telephone - An inexpensive option that uses any phone line and a modem. 
   The low bandwidth provided by a dial-up modem connection is usually not sufficient for large data transfer, although it is useful for mobile access while traveling.
  
  Businesses Internet Connections
  Dedicated Leased Line - Leased lines are actually reserved circuits within the service provider’s network that connect geographically separated offices for private voice and/or data networking. 
   The circuits are typically rented at a monthly or yearly rate. They can be expensive.
  Ethernet WAN - Ethernet WANs extend LAN access technology into the WAN. Ethernet is a LAN technology you will learn about in a later chapter. 
   The benefits of Ethernet are now being extended into the WAN. 
  DSL - Business DSL is available in various formats. 
   A popular choice is Symmetric Digital Subscriber Lines (SDSL) which is similar to the consumer version of DSL, but provides uploads and downloads at the same speeds.  
  Satellite - Similar to small office and home office users, satellite service can provide a connection when a wired solution is not available. 
  
  Today, the separate data, telephone, and video networks are converging. 
  Unlike dedicated networks, converged networks are capable of delivering data, voice, and video between many different types of devices over the same network infrastructure, as shown in the figure. 
  As networks evolve, we are discovering that there are four basic characteristics that the underlying architectures need to address in order to meet user expectations: 
  Fault Tolerance 
  Scalability
  Quality of Service (QoS) 
  Security
  
  
II. Configure a Network Operating System

  The Cisco Internetwork Operating System (IOS) is a generic term for the collection of network operating systems used by Cisco networking devices. 
  Cisco IOS is used for most Cisco devices, regardless of the type or size.
  
 1 - Primary Command Modes
  User EXEC Mode - This mode has limited capabilities but is useful for basic operations. 
   It allows only a limited number of basic monitoring commands but does not allow the execution of any commands that might change the configuration of the device. 
   The user EXEC mode is identified by the CLI prompt that ends with the > symbol.
  Privileged EXEC Mode - To execute configuration commands, a network administrator must access privileged EXEC mode. 
   Higher configuration modes, like global configuration mode, can only be reached from privileged EXEC mode. 
   The privileged EXEC mode can be identified by the prompt ending with the # symbol.
  Global config mode - To configure the device, the user must enter Global Configuration Mode, which is commonly called global config mode. 
   Global configuration mode is identified by a prompt that ends with (config)# after the device name, such as Switch(config)#.
  
  Two common sub-configuration modes include:
   Line Configuration Mode - Used to configure console, SSH, Telnet, or AUX access.
    For example, the default prompt for line configuration mode is Switch(config-line)#
   Interface Configuration Mode - Used to configure a switch port or router network interface.
    Default prompt for interface configuration mode is Switch(config-if)#.
   
 2 - Secure Device Access
  Securing Administrative access
   Secure privileged EXEC access with password
   Secure user EXEC access with password
   Secure remote Telnet/SSH access with password

  Other tasks
   Encrypt all passwords if there are any in plain text
   Change banners

  Configure Passwords
  Priv Exec mode (from config mode)
  S1(config)# enable secret PASSWORD
  S1(config)# end

  User Exec mode (from config mode)  
  S1(config)# line console 0
  S1(config-line)# password PASSWORD
  S1(config-line)# login
  S1(config-line)# end
  
  VTY (telnet/ssh) access
  S1(config)# line vty 0 15
  S1(config-line)# password PASSWORD
  S1(config-line)# login
  S1(config-line)# end
	
 3 - Save configuration files
  There are two system files that store the device configuration:
  startup-config - The file stored in Non-volatile Random Access Memory (NVRAM) that contains all of the commands that will be used by the device upon startup 
   or reboot. NVRAM does not lose its contents when the device is powered off.
  running-config - The file stored in Random Access Memory (RAM) that reflects the current configuration. 
   Modifying a running configuration affects the operation of a Cisco device immediately. 
   RAM is volatile memory. It loses all of its content when the device is powered off or restarted.   
  
 4 - Interfaces and Ports
  A cable connecting to the interface must be designed to match the physical standards of the interface. 
  Types of network media include twisted-pair copper cables, fiber-optic cables, coaxial cables, or wireless 
  Some of the differences between various types of media include:
  Distance the media can successfully carry a signal
  Environment in which the media is to be installed
  Amount of data and the speed at which it must be transmitted
  Cost of the media and installation
  
  Ethernet is the most common local area network (LAN) technology used today. 
  Ethernet ports are found on end-user devices, switch devices, and other networking devices that can physically connect to the network using a cable. 
  
  Cisco IOS Layer 2 switches have physical ports for devices to connect. 
  These ports do not support Layer 3 IP addresses. Therefore, switches have one or more switch virtual interfaces (SVIs).
  The virtual interface provides a means to remotely manage a switch over a network using IPv4. 
  Each switch comes with one SVI appearing in the default configuration "out-of-the-box." The default SVI is interface VLAN1.
  
  Switch Virtual Interface Configuration (from global config)
  interface vlan 1
  ip address IP NETMASK
  no shutdown
  
  Commands:
  enable                                                     # privileged exec mode
  configure terminal                                         # global config mode 
  interface FastEthernet 0/1                                 # interface managment mode
  hostname NAME                                              # device hostname
  service password-encryption                                # global conf command provide encryption for plain pass
  banner motd # the message of the day #                      
  copy running-config startup-config                         # Save config file after changes
  show ip interface brief                                    # show interface status and address if any
  
  
III. Network Protocols and Communications
   
 1 - Communication Fundamentals
  An identified sender and receiver
  Common language and grammar
  Speed and timing of delivery
  Confirmation or acknowledgment requirements 
  
  Message Encoding
  One of the first steps to sending a message is encoding. Encoding is the process of converting information into another acceptable form, for transmission. 
  Decoding reverses this process in order to interpret the information. 
  
  Message Formatting and Encapsulation
  When a message is sent from source to destination, it must use a specific format or structure. 
  Message formats depend on the type of message and the channel that is used to deliver the message.
  
  Message Size
  The size restrictions of frames require the source host to break a long message into 
  individual pieces that meet both the minimum and maximum size requirements.
  
  Message Delivery Options
  Unicast - one-to-one delivery option
  Multicast - one-to-many delivery option
  Broadcast - one-to-all message delivery option
  
 2 - Network Protocols
  Networking protocols define a common format and set of rules for exchanging messages between devices. 
  Some common networking protocols are Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), and Internet Protocol (IP). 
  
  Example
  Communication between a web server and web client is an example of an interaction between several protocols.
  HTTP - is an application protocol that governs the way a web server and a web client interact. 
   HTTP defines the content and formatting of the requests and responses that are exchanged between the client and server. 
   Both the client and the web server software implement HTTP as part of the application. 
   HTTP relies on other protocols to govern how the messages are transported between the client and server.
  TCP - is the transport protocol that manages the individual conversations. 
   TCP divides the HTTP messages into smaller pieces, called segments. 
   These segments are sent between the web server and client processes running at the destination host. 
   TCP is also responsible for controlling the size and rate at which messages are exchanged between the server and the client.
  IP - is responsible for taking the formatted segments from TCP, encapsulating them into packets, assigning them the appropriate addresses, 
   and delivering them to the destination host.
  Ethernet - is a network access protocol that describes two primary functions: communication over a data link and the physical transmission of data on the network media. 
   Network access protocols are responsible for taking the packets from IP and formatting them to be transmitted over the media.
  
  TCP/IP Protocol Suite and model
  Today, the TCP/IP protocol suite includes many protocols. Some of the more popular ones are shown
  Aplication Layer  - DNS, DHCP, BOOTP, SMTP, POP, IMAP, FTP,TFP, HTTP
  Transport Layer - UDP,TCP
  Internet Layer - IP, NAT, ICMP, routing protocols (OSPF, EIGRP)
  Network access layer - ARP , PPP, Ethernet , Device drivers 
  
 3 - Network standarts
  Open standards encourage interoperability, competition, and innovation. 
  They also guarantee that no single company’s product can monopolize the market, or have an unfair advantage over its competition.

  Standards organizations are usually vendor-neutral, non-profit institutions established to develop and promote the concept of open standards.
   Internet Society (ISOC) – Responsible for promoting the open development and evolution of Internet use throughout the world.
   Internet Architecture Board (IAB) - Responsible for the overall management and development of Internet standards. 
   Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) - Develops, updates, and maintains Internet and TCP/IP technologies. 
    This includes the process and documents for developing new protocols and updating existing protocols know as Request for Comments (RFC) documents	
   Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) - Focused on long-term research related to Internet and TCP/IP protocols such as Anti-Spam Research Group (ASRG), 
    Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG), and Peer-to-Peer Research Group (P2PRG).
   Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) - Based in the United States, coordinates IP address allocation, the management of domain names, 
    and assignment of other information used TCP/IP protocols.
   Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) - Responsible for overseeing and managing IP address allocation, domain name management, and protocol identifiers for ICANN.	
  
 4 - Reference Models
  OSI Model and TCP/IP Model Comparison
  
                  OSI Model                                                   TCP/IP model
				 Aplication
				 Presentation                                                 Aplication
				 Session
				 
				 Transport                                                    Transport
				 
				 Network                                                      Internet
				 
				 Data link
	 			                                                              Network access
				 Physical
  
 5 - Protocol Data Units (mess segments) for every layer
  The form that a piece of data takes at any layer is called a protocol data unit (PDU). 
  During encapsulation, each succeeding layer encapsulates the PDU that it receives from the layer above in accordance with the protocol being used.
  
  Aplication layer - Data
  Transport layer  - Segment
  Network layer    - Packet
  Data link layer  - Frame
  physical layer   - bits
  
 6 - Network Addresses
  Network layer source and destination addresses - Responsible for delivering the IP packet from the original source to the final destination, 
   either on the same network or to a remote network. (layer 3 IPs)
  Data link layer source and destination addresses – Responsible for delivering the data link frame from one network interface card (NIC)
   to another NIC on the same network. (layer 2 MAC)
  
  An IP address is the network layer, or Layer 3, logical address used to deliver the IP packet from the original source to the final destination
  The purpose of the data link address, (or layer 2 physical address) is to deliver the data link frame from one network interface 
   to another network interface on the same network.
  
  
IV. Network access

  Different physical media support the transfer of bits at different rates. Data transfer is usually discussed in terms of bandwidth and throughput. 
  Bandwidth is the capacity of a medium to carry data. Digital bandwidth measures the amount of data that can flow from one place to another in a given amount of time. 
  Bandwidth is typically measured in kilobits per second (kb/s), megabits per second (Mb/s), or gigabits per second (Gb/s).
  Bandwidth is sometimes thought of as the speed that bits travel, however this is not accurate. 
  For example, in both 10Mb/s and 100Mb/s Ethernet, the bits are sent at the speed of electricity. 
  The difference is the number of bits that are transmitted per second. 
  
  Throughput is the measure of the transfer of bits across the media over a given period of time. 
  Due to a number of factors, throughput usually does not match the specified bandwidth in physical layer implementations. 
  Many factors influence throughput, including:
  The amount of traffic
  The type of traffic
  The latency created by the number of network devices encountered between source and destination
  
 1 - Characteristics of Copper Cabling
  Networks use copper media because it is inexpensive, easy to install, and has low resistance to electrical current. 
  However, copper media is limited by distance and signal interference.
  Data is transmitted on copper cables as electrical pulses. A detector in the network interface of a destination device must receive a signal 
  that can be successfully decoded to match the signal sent. 
  However, the longer the signal travels, the more it deteriorates. This is referred to as signal attenuation. 
  For this reason, all copper media must follow strict distance limitations as specified by the guiding standards.
  
  The timing and voltage values of the electrical pulses are also susceptible to interference from two sources:
  Electromagnetic interference (EMI) or radio frequency interference (RFI) - EMI and RFI signals can distort and corrupt the data signals being carried by copper media. 
   Potential sources of EMI and RFI include radio waves and electromagnetic devices, such as fluorescent lights or electric motors.
  Crosstalk - Crosstalk is a disturbance caused by the electric or magnetic fields of a signal on one wire to the signal in an adjacent wire. 
   In telephone circuits, crosstalk can result in hearing part of another voice conversation from an adjacent circuit. 
   Specifically, when an electrical current flows through a wire, it creates a small, circular magnetic field around the wire, 
   which can be picked up by an adjacent wire.

 2 - Copper Media
  These cables are used to interconnect nodes on a LAN and infrastructure devices such as switches, routers, and wireless access points. 
  Each type of connection and the accompanying devices has cabling requirements stipulated by physical layer standards.
 
  There are three main types of copper media used in networking:
  Unshielded Twisted-Pair (UTP)
   Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) cabling is the most common networking media. 
   UTP cabling, terminated with RJ-45 connectors, is used for interconnecting network hosts with intermediate networking devices, such as switches and routers.
  Shielded Twisted-Pair (STP)
   Shielded twisted-pair (STP) provides better noise protection than UTP cabling. 
   However, compared to UTP cable, STP cable is significantly more expensive and difficult to install. Like UTP cable, STP uses an RJ-45 connector. 
  Coaxial
   Coaxial cable, or coax for short, gets its name from the fact that there are two conductors that share the same axis
   coaxial cable consists of:
   A copper conductor used to transmit the electronic signals.
   A layer of flexible plastic insulation surrounding a copper conductor. 
   The insulating material is surrounded in a woven copper braid, or metallic foil, that acts as the second wire in the circuit and as a shield for the inner conductor.
   The entire cable is covered with a cable jacket to prevent minor physical damage.

  Types of UTP Cable
  Ethernet Straight-through: The most common type of networking cable. It is commonly used to interconnect a host to a switch and a switch to a router.
  Ethernet Crossover: A cable used to interconnect similar devices. For example to connect a switch to a switch, a host to a host, or a router to a router.
  Rollover: A Cisco proprietary cable used to connect a workstation to a router or switch console port. 
  
 3 - Optic Media
  Optical fiber cable transmits data over longer distances and at higher bandwidths than any other networking media. 
  Unlike copper wires, fiber-optic cable can transmit signals with less attenuation and is completely immune to EMI and RFI.
  Optical fiber is a flexible, but extremely thin, transparent strand of very pure glass, not much bigger than a human hair. 
  Bits are encoded on the fiber as light impulses. 
  The fiber-optic cable acts as a waveguide, or “light pipe,” to transmit light between the two ends with minimal loss of signal.

  Fiber-optic cabling is now being used in four types of industry:
  Enterprise Networks: Used for backbone cabling applications and interconnecting infrastructure devices.
  Fiber-to-the-Home (FTTH): Used to provide always-on broadband services to homes and small businesses.  
  Long-Haul Networks: Used by service providers to connect countries and cities.
  Submarine Cable Networks: Used to provide reliable high-speed, high-capacity solutions capable of surviving in harsh undersea environments up to transoceanic distances.   

  Types of Fiber Media
  Single-mode fiber (SMF): Consists of a very small core and uses expensive laser technology to send a single ray of light
   Popular in long-distance situations spanning hundreds of kilometers, such as those required in long haul telephony and cable TV applications.
  Multimode fiber (MMF): Consists of a larger core and uses LED emitters to send light pulses. 
   Specifically, light from an LED enters the multimode fiber at different angles,
   Popular in LANs because they can be powered by low-cost LEDs. It provides bandwidth up to 10 Gb/s over link lengths of up to 550 meters.
   
 4 - Data link layer
  The data link layer of the OSI model (Layer 2), is responsible for:
  Allowing the upper layers to access the media 
  Accepting Layer 3 packets and packaging them into frames
  Preparing network data for the physical network
  Controlling how data is placed and received on the media
  Exchanging frames between nodes over a physical network media, such as UTP or fiber-optic
  Receiving and directing packets to an upper layer protocol
  Performing error detection
  
  Data link sublayers
  Logical Link Control (LLC) - This upper sublayer communicates with the network layer. 
   It places information in the frame that identifies which network layer protocol is being used for the frame. 
   This information allows multiple Layer 3 protocols, such as IPv4 and IPv6, to utilize the same network interface and media. 
  Media Access Control (MAC) - This lower sublayer defines the media access processes performed by the hardware. 
   It provides data link layer addressing and access to various network technologies.

  The Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) process is used in half-duplex Ethernet LANs
  If two devices transmit at the same time, a collision will occur. Both devices will detect the collision on the network, this is the collision detection (CD).
  Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance (CSMA/CA). CMSA/CA uses a method similar to CSMA/CD to detect if the media is clear. 
  CMSA/CA also uses additional techniques. CMSA/CA does not detect collisions but attempts to avoid them by waiting before transmitting.

  Frame Fields:
  Frame start and stop indicator flags - Used to identify the beginning and end limits of the frame.
  Addressing - Indicates the source and destination nodes on the media.
  Type - Identifies the Layer 3 protocol in the data field.
  Control - Identifies special flow control services such as quality of service (QoS). QoS is used to give forwarding priority to certain types of messages. 
   Data link frames carrying voice over IP (VoIP) packets normally receive priority because they are sensitive to delay.
  Data - Contains the frame payload (i.e., packet header, segment header, and the data).
  Error Detection - These frame fields are used for error detection and are included after the data to form the trailer. 
  
  The data link layer provides addressing that is used in transporting a frame across a shared local media. Device addresses at this layer are referred to as physical addresses.
  Unlike Layer 3 logical addresses, which are hierarchical, physical addresses do not indicate on what network the device is located. Rather, the physical address is unique to the specific device. 
  If the device is moved to another network or subnet, it will still function with the same Layer 2 physical address. 

  Data link layer protocols include: 
  Ethernet 
  802.11 Wireless
  Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) 
  HDLC
  Frame Relay
  
 
V. Ethernet
  Ethernet is the most widely used LAN technology today.  
  Ethernet operates in the data link layer and the physical layer. 
  It is a family of networking technologies that are defined in the IEEE 802.2 and 802.3 standards.
  Ethernet supports data bandwidths of 10mb/s to 100 000 Mb/s(100Gb/s)
  
 1 - Ethernet encapsulation 
  Ethernet relies on the two separate sublayers of the data link layer to operate, the Logical Link Control (LLC) and the MAC sublayers.
  
  LLC sublayer
  The Ethernet LLC sublayer handles the communication between the upper layers and the lower layers. 
  This is typically between the networking software and the device hardware.
  LLC is implemented in software, and its implementation is independent of the hardware. In a computer, 
  the LLC can be considered the driver software for the NIC.
  
  MAC sublayer
  MAC is implemented by hardware, typically in the computer NIC.
  Ethernet MAC sublayer has two primary responsibilities:
  Data encapsulation
   The data encapsulation process includes frame assembly before transmission, and frame disassembly upon reception of a frame.
   Data encapsulation provides three primary functions:
   Frame delimiting
   Error detection
   Addressing
  Media access control
   Media access control is responsible for the placement of frames on the media and the removal of frames from the media.
	
  The process that a source host uses to determine the destination MAC address is known as Address Resolution Protocol (ARP).	
  Many network protocols, such as DHCP and ARP, use broadcasts.	
  When the IPv4 broadcast packet is encapsulated in the Ethernet frame, 
  the destination MAC address is the broadcast MAC address of FF-FF-FF-FF-FF-FF in hexadecimal	
	
 2 - Switch Fundamentals
  A Layer 2 Ethernet switch uses MAC addresses to make forwarding decisions.
  The switch makes its forwarding decisions based only on the Layer 2 Ethernet MAC addresses.  
  Unlike legacy Ethernet hubs that repeat bits out all ports except the incoming port, 
  an Ethernet switch consults a MAC address table to make a forwarding decision for each frame.	
  The MAC address table is sometimes referred to as a content addressable memory (CAM) table.	
	
  The switch dynamically builds the MAC address table by examining the source MAC address of the frames received 
  on a port. The switch forwards frames by searching for a match between the destination 
  MAC address in the frame and an entry in the MAC address table.	
	
 3 - Frame Forwarding Methods on Cisco Switches
  Switches use one of the following forwarding methods for switching data between network ports: 
 
  Store-and-forward switching
   In store-and-forward switching, when the switch receives the frame, 
   it stores the data in buffers until the complete frame has been received.
   In this process, the switch also performs an error check using the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) trailer portion of the Ethernet frame.
  Cut-through switching
   The switch buffers just enough of the frame to read the destination MAC address so that it can determine to which port to forward the data.
   The switch does not perform any error checking on the frame. 	
   There are two variants of cut-through switching:
    Fast-forward switching - Fast-forward switching offers the lowest level of latency. 
	Fast-forward switching immediately forwards a packet after reading the destination address.
    Fragment-free switching 
    In fragment-free switching, the switch stores the first 64 bytes of the frame before forwarding. 
	The reason fragment-free switching stores only the first 64 bytes of the frame is that most network errors and collisions occur during the first 64 bytes.
	Fragment-free switching tries to enhance fast-forward switching by performing a small error check on the first 64 bytes 
	of the frame to ensure that a collision has not occurred before forwarding

 4 - Memory Buffering on Switches
  An Ethernet switch may use a buffering technique to store frames before forwarding them.
  there are two methods of memory buffering: port-based and shared memory.
  
  Port-based Memory Buffering
  In port-based memory buffering, frames are stored in queues that are linked to specific incoming and outgoing ports.
  
  Shared Memory Buffering 
  Shared memory buffering deposits all frames into a common memory buffer that all the ports on the switch share.
  
 5 - Duplex and Speed Settings
  There are two types of duplex settings used for communications on an Ethernet network: half duplex and full duplex.
  Full-duplex – Both ends of the connection can send and receive simultaneously. 
  Half-duplex – Only one end of the connection can send at a time. 

  Autonegotiation is an optional function found on most Ethernet switches and NICs. Autonegotiation enables 
  two devices to automatically exchange information about speed and duplex capabilities.

  Auto-MDIX
  When the auto-MDIX feature is enabled, the switch detects the type of cable attached to the port, and configures the interfaces accordingly. 
  Therefore, you can use either a crossover or a straight-through cable for connections

 6 - Introduction to ARP
  To determine the destination MAC address, the device uses ARP. ARP provides two basic functions:
  Resolving IPv4 addresses to MAC addresses.
  Maintaining a table of mappings  

  For each device, an ARP cache timer removes ARP entries that have not been used for a specified period of time.
  On a Cisco router, the show ip arp command is used to display the ARP table
  In some cases, the use of ARP can lead to a potential security risk known as ARP spoofing or ARP poisoning. 
  This is a technique used by an attacker to reply to an ARP request for an IPv4 address belonging to another device, 
  such as the default gateway


Vi. Network Layer
  The network layer, or OSI Layer 3, provides services to allow end devices to exchange data across the network.
  To accomplish this end-to-end transport, the network layer uses four basic processes:
  Addressing end devices
  Encapsulation
  Routing 
  De-encapsulation
  
  There are several network layer protocols in existence.
  Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4)
  Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6)
  
 1 - Characteristics of IP
  connectionless - no connection with the destination is established before sending data packets
  best effort - IP is unreliable because packet delivery is not guaranteed
  media independant - operation is independent of the mediaum (copper,fiber optic,wireless) carrying the data
  
 2 - IPv4 Packet Header
  Significant fields in the IPv4 header include:
  Version ,Differentiated Services or DiffServ (DS), Time-to-Live (TTL), Protocol , Source IPv4 Address, Destination IPv4 Address

 3 - Router Packet Forwarding Decision
  The router looks at its routing table to determine where to forward packets.
  The routing table of a router can store information about:
  Directly-connected routes
  Remote routes 
  Default route

  On a Cisco IOS router, the show ip route command can be used to display the router’s IPv4 routing table  
  C - Identifies a directly-connected network. Directly-connected networks are automatically created when an interface is configured with an IP address and activated.
  L - Identifies that this is a local interface. This is the IPv4 address of the interface on the router.
  
 4 - Anatomy of a router
  The CPU requires an OS to provide routing and switching functions. The Cisco Internetwork Operating System (IOS) is the system software used for most Cisco devices
  Specifically, a Cisco router uses four types of memory:   
  RAM - This is volatile memory used in Cisco routers to store applications, processes, and data needed to be executed by the CPU. 
  Cisco routers use a fast type of RAM called synchronous dynamic random access memory (SDRAM)
  ROM - This non-volatile memory is used to store crucial operational instructions and a limited IOS. Specifically, 
  ROM is firmware embedded on an integrated circuit inside the router which can only be altered by Cisco.
  NVRAM – This is non-volatile memory is used as the permanent storage for the startup configuration file (startup-config). 
  Flash - This non-volatile computer memory used as permanent storage for the IOS and other system related files such as log files, voice configuration files, 
  HTML files, backup configurations, and more. When a router is rebooted, the IOS is copied from flash into RAM. 
 
  Both Cisco routers and switches load the IOS image and startup configuration file into RAM when they are booted
  Router Bootup Process
  1. Perform the POST and load the bootstrap program.
  2. Locate and load the Cisco IOS software.
  3. Locate and load the startup configuration file or enter setup mode.
  
 5 - Basic switch configuration tasks
  Configure device name
  hostname NAME
  Secure user exec mode
  line console 0
  password PASS
  login
  Secure remote access (telnet,ssh)
  line vty 0 15
  password PASS
  login
  Secure privliged exec mode
  enable secret PASS
  Secure all passwords in the config file
  service password-encyption
  Provide legal notice
  banner motd delimiter message delimiter
  Configure managment SVI
  interface vlan 1
  ip address IP MASK
  ip default-gateway IP 
  no shutdown
  Save config
  copy running-config startup-config  
 
 
VII. IP Addressing
 
 1 - IPv4 Addresses
  Each address consists of a string of 32 bits, divided into four sections called octets. 
  Each octet contains 8 bits (or 1 byte) separated with a dot.
 
 2 - Network and Host Portions
  Subnet mask- Used to identify the network/host portion of the IPv4 address
  The Prefix Length
  standart subnet masks         various lentgh subnet mask  
  255.255.255.0 = /24           255.255.255.252 = /30
  255.255.0.0 = /16             255.255.252.0 = /23
  255.0.0.0 = /8                etc..
 
  Network, Host, and Broadcast Addresses
  example
  192.168.1.0/24 - network
  192.168.1.11/24 - host
  192.168.1.255/24 - broadcasts
  
  Devices can be assigned an IP address either statically or dynamically.
  Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) - used for automatic IP asignment

  IPv4 has reserved the 224.0.0.0 to 239.255.255.255 addresses as a multicast range. 
  The IPv4 multicast addresses 224.0.0.0 to 224.0.0.255 are reserved for multicasting on the local network only.
 
 3 - Public and Private IPv4 Addresses
  Specifically, the private address blocks are: 
  10.0.0.0 /8 or 10.0.0.0 to 10.255.255.255
  172.16.0.0 /12 or 172.16.0.0 to 172.31.255.255
  192.168.0.0 /16 or 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.255.255
 
  Special User IPv4 Addresses
  Loopback addresses (127.0.0.0 /8 or 127.0.0.1 to 127.255.255.254)
  Link-Local addresses (169.254.0.0 /16 or 169.254.0.1 to 169.254.255.254)
  TEST-NET addresses (192.0.2.0/24 or 192.0.2.0 to 192.0.2.255)
  
 4 - IPv6
  IPv6 is designed to be the successor to IPv4. IPv6 has a larger 128-bit address space, providing for 340 undecillion addresses. 
  IPv4 and IPv6 Coexistence
  The migration techniques can be divided into three categories:
  Dual Stack – dual stack allows IPv4 and IPv6 to coexist on the same network segment. 
  Dual stack devices run both IPv4 and IPv6 protocol stacks simultaneously.
  Tunneling – tunneling is a method of transporting an IPv6 packet over an IPv4 network. 
  The IPv6 packet is encapsulated inside an IPv4 packet, similar to other types of data. 
  Translation – Network Address Translation 64 (NAT64) allows IPv6-enabled devices 
  to communicate with IPv4-enabled devices using a translation technique similar to NAT for IPv4
  
  IPv6 address representation
  Rule 1 – Omit Leading 0s
  01AB can be represented as 1AB
  Rule 2 – Omit All 0 Segments
  2001:0DB8::ABCD:0000:0000:1234 = 2001:0DB8::ABCD::1234
  
  IPv6 uses the prefix length to represent the prefix portion of the address.
  address length is 128 bits or 8 sixtentets
  
 5 - IPv6 Unicast Addresses
  Global unicast  
  A global unicast address is similar to a public IPv4 address. These are globally unique, Internet routable addresses.

  Link-local
  Link-local addresses are used to communicate with other devices on the same local link. With IPv6, the term link refers to a subnet.
  FE80::/10 range
  
  Unique local
  Unique local addresses are used for local addressing within a site or between a limited number of sites. 
  These addresses should not be routable in the global IPv6 and should not be translated to a global IPv6 address. 
  Unique local addresses are in the range of FC00::/7 to FDFF::/7. 

  The command to configure an IPv6 global unicast address on an interface is ipv6 address ipv6-address/prefix-length.
  There are two ways in which a device can obtain an IPv6 global unicast address automatically:
  Stateless Address Autoconfiguration (SLAAC) is a method that allows a device to obtain its prefix, prefix length, default gateway address, 
  and other information from an IPv6 router without the use of a DHCPv6 server. 
  Using SLAAC, devices rely on the local router’s ICMPv6 Router Advertisement (RA) messages to obtain the necessary information.

  Stateful DHCPv6
  SLAAC and Stateless DHCPv6
  With this option, the RA message suggests devices use:
  SLAAC to create its own IPv6 global unicast address.
  The router’s link-local address, the RA’s source IPv6 address for the default gateway address.
  A stateless DHCPv6 server to obtain other information such as a DNS server address and a domain name.
  Stateful DHCPv6 is similar to DHCP for IPv4. A device can automatically receive its addressing information 
  including a global unicast address, prefix length, and the addresses of DNS servers using the services of a stateful DHCPv6 server. 
  

VIII. Subneting IP networks
  
 1 - Broadcast Domains
  In an Ethernet LAN, devices use broadcasts to locate:
  Other devices – A device uses Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) which sends Layer 2 broadcasts to a known IPv4 address 
  on the local network to discover the associated MAC address. 
  Services – A host typically acquires its IPv4 address configuration using the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) 
  which sends broadcasts on the local network to locate a DHCP server.

  There are two considerations when planning subnets: 
  the number of host addresses required for each network 
  the number of individual subnets needed 
  

IX. Transport layer
  The transport layer is responsible for establishing a temporary communication session between two applications and delivering data between them.
  
 1 - Transport Layer Responsibilities
  Tracking Individual Conversations
  Segmenting Data and Reassembling Segments
  Identifying the Applications 
  
  To pass data streams to the proper applications, the transport layer must identify the target application
  To accomplish this, the transport layer assigns each application an identifier called a port number. 
  
  Transport protocols specify how to transfer messages between hosts. TCP/IP provides two transport layer protocols, 
  Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP)

 2 - TCP
  With TCP, there are three basic operations of reliability:
  Numbering and tracking data segments transmitted to a specific host from a specific application
  Acknowledging received data
  Retransmitting any unacknowledged data after a certain period of time
  
  TCP Features
  Establishing a Session
  TCP is a connection-oriented protocol. A connection-oriented protocol is one that negotiates and establishes a permanent connection 
  (or session) between source and destination
  
  Reliable Delivery
  In networking terms, reliability means ensuring that each segment that the source sends arrives at the destination.
  
  Same-Order Delivery
  Because networks may provide multiple routes that can have different transmission rates, data can arrive in the wrong order. 
  By numbering and sequencing the segments, TCP can ensure that these segments are reassembled into the proper order. 
  
  Flow Control
  Network hosts have limited resources, such as memory and processing power. 
  When TCP is aware that these resources are overtaxed, it can request that the sending application reduce the rate of data flow. 
  This is done by TCP regulating the amount of data the source transmits.
  
  A TCP connection is established in three steps:
  Step 1 - The initiating client requests a client-to-server communication session with the server.
  Step 2 - The server acknowledges the client-to-server communication session and requests a server-to-client communication session. 
  Step 3 - The initiating client acknowledges the server-to-client communication session.
  (3 way handshake)
  
  TCP connection termination.
  Step 1 - When the client has no more data to send in the stream, it sends a segment with the FIN flag set.
  Step 2 - The server sends an ACK to acknowledge the receipt of the FIN to terminate the session from client to server.
  Step 3 - The server sends a FIN to the client to terminate the server-to-client session.
  Step 4 - The client responds with an ACK to acknowledge the FIN from the server.
  
 3 - UDP
  UDP provides the basic functions for delivering data segments between the appropriate applications, with very little overhead and data checking. 
  UDP is known as a best-effort delivery protocol. 
  In the context of networking, best-effort delivery is referred to as unreliable because there is no acknowledgment that the data is received at the destination
  UDP is a lightweight transport protocol that offers the same data segmentation and reassembly as TCP, but without TCP reliability and flow control.
  UDP is a stateless protocol, meaning neither the client, nor the server, is obligated to keep track of the state of the communication session. 
  If reliability is required when using UDP as the transport protocol, it must be handled by the application.

 4 - Port Number Groups
  Well-known Ports (Numbers 0 to 1023)
  Registered Ports (Numbers 1024 to 49151)
  Dynamic or Private Ports (Numbers 49152 to 65535)
  

X. Application Layer
 
 1 - The Application Layer
  he application layer is closest to the end users, it is the layer that provides the interface between the applications used 
  to communicate and the underlying network over which messages are transmitted.
  There are many application layer protocols, and new protocols are always being developed. 
  Some of the most widely known application layer protocols include Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), 
  Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP), Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), and Domain Name System (DNS) protocol.
  
 2 - The Presentation Layer
  The presentation layer has three primary functions:
  Formatting, or presenting, data at the source device into a compatible form for receipt by the destination device
  Compressing data in a way that can be decompressed by the destination device
  Encrypting data for transmission and decrypting data upon receipt
  
 3 - The Session Layer
  As the name implies, functions at the session layer create and maintain dialogs between source and destination applications. 
  The session layer handles the exchange of information to initiate dialogs, keep them active, 
  and to restart sessions that are disrupted or idle for a long period of time.
  
 4 - Client-Server Models
  In the client-server model, the device requesting the information is called a client 
  and the device responding to the request is called a server.  
  
 5 - Peer-to-Peer Networks
  In the peer-to-peer (P2P) networking model, the data is accessed from a peer device without the use of a dedicated server.
  Every connected end device (known as a peer) can function as both a server and a client.  
  
 6 - Hypertext Transfer Protocol and Hypertext Markup Language
  When a web address or uniform resource locator (URL) is typed into a web browser, the web browser establishes 
  a connection to the web service running on the server using the HTTP protocol. 
  URLs and Uniform Resource Identifier (URIs) are the names most people associate with web addresses.  
  
  HTTP is a request/response protocol. When a client, typically a web browser, sends a request to a web server, 
  HTTP specifies the message types used for that communication. The three common message types are
  GET - A client request for data. A client (web browser) sends the GET message to the web server to request HTML pages.
  POST - Uploads data files to the web server such as form data.
  PUT - Uploads resources or content to the web server such as an image. 
 
 7 - Email Protocols
  Email supports three separate protocols for operation: Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Post Office Protocol (POP), and IMAP. 
  The application layer process that sends mail uses SMTP. 
  A client retrieves email, however, using one of the two application layer protocols: POP or IMAP.
 
 8 - DNS (Domain name system)
 
 9 - Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
  The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) for IPv4 service automates the assignment of IPv4 addresses, 
  subnet masks, gateways, and other IPv4 networking parameters.
 
 10 - Enable SSH on cisco device
  config mode commands:
  ip domain-name example.com
  crypto key generate rsa 
  username NAME password PASS
  line vty 0 4
  login local
  transport input ssh
  service password-encryption
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 